PCP-6627 - Override Cluster API Properties feature (#10478)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/architecture/override-capi-properties/override-capi-properties.md

---

> sidebar_label: "Override Cluster API Properties"

Reviewer: I suppose the use of acronym is intentional here?
According to the [style guide](https://spectrocloud.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/DE/pages/1765933057/Spectro+Cloud+Internal+Style+Guide#Headings):
<img width="782" height="155" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/27e81a5c-c896-467c-9fb0-a5858982402f" />

Author: @svetlana-efimova This is a sidebar_label rather than the title. The title has it spelled out 😄. For sidebar_labels, we always need to consider short forms or acronyms due to available space.

provision and manage Kubernetes clusters. When provisioning a cluster, Palette populates only a curated subset of the
properties supported by the underlying CAPI objects. For most use cases, this is sufficient. However, some advanced or
provider-specific configurations exist in the CAPI provider spec but are not surfaced in the Palette UI or API.

You can override these properties by supplying YAML directly targeting the underlying CAPI provider objects at both the
cluster level and the node pool level. This allows you to configure any property supported by the CAPI provider version
in use, without waiting for Palette to add native support for each field.

:::warning

Overriding CAPI properties is an advanced feature intended for experienced users. Supplying invalid or conflicting
configuration can result in cluster provisioning failures, unexpected node pool repaves, or degraded cluster behavior.
Use with caution and test changes in a non-production environment first.

:::

## Supported Providers

Overriding CAPI properties is currently supported for the following infrastructure types. Override fields must be valid
for the listed provider API version.

> | Provider  | CAPI Provider | Version                                                                                       | Reference Docs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Provider  | CAPI Implementation | Version                                                                                       | Reference Docs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
```
Maybe? To not repeat "Provider"?

| --------- | ------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | AWS IaaS  | CAPA          | [v2.7.1](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/releases/tag/v2.7.1)     | - [CAPA book](https://cluster-api-aws.sigs.k8s.io/) <br /> - [v2.7.1 AWSCluster Types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/v2.7.1/api/v1beta2/awscluster_types.go) <br /> - [v2.7.1 AWSMachineTemplate Types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/v2.7.1/api/v1beta2/awsmachinetemplate_types.go)                                    |

Reviewer: Is the use of Pascal case intentional in the last column? ("AWSCluster", "AzureManagedControlPlane", etc)

Author: Yes, intentional to match the Go templates.

## Supported Interfaces

Overriding CAPI properties can be implemented through the following Spectro Cloud / Palette interfaces:

- [Palette UI](https://console.spectrocloud.com/)
- [Palette API](/api/introduction/)
- [Spectro Cloud Terraform Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/spectrocloud/spectrocloud/latest/docs)
- [Palette Crossplane Provider](https://marketplace.upbound.io/providers/crossplane-contrib/provider-palette/)

## How Overrides Work

You supply a raw YAML string that describes the properties you want to set on the underlying CAPI object. Palette
applies this as an [RFC 7396 JSON merge patch](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7396) to the CAPI object it has

> already built. Palette converts the YAML to JSON before applying the merge patch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You supply a raw YAML string that describes the properties you want to set on the underlying CAPI object. Palette converts the YAML to JSON and applies it as an [RFC 7396 JSON merge patch](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7396) to the CAPI object it has already built.
```

The YAML you provide maps directly to the specification of the target CAPI object. For example, if you want to set the

> control plane load balancer type with additional cluster tags on an AWS IaaS cluster, you would provide override YAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
control plane load balancer type with additional cluster tags on an AWS IaaS cluster, provide an override YAML
```

that maps to `awsCluster.spec`.

```yaml hideClipboard title="Example AWSCluster override YAML"
awsCluster:
  spec:
    controlPlaneLoadBalancer:
      loadBalancerType: nlb
      preserveClientIP: true
    additionalTags:
      env: test
      owner: qa
```

:::info

> Override values always take precedence over values that Palette sets natively as it is applied last in the merge patch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Override values always take precedence over values that Palette sets natively, as it is applied last in the merge patch
```

> process. If there are any conflicts between override and native values, the override value wins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process. If there are any conflicts between override and native values, the override value is applied.
```

:::

### Key Format

The top-level key is always the camelCase form of the CAPI Kind. All nested keys are derived from the `json` struct tag

> in the provider's Go types, or the camelCase form of the field name if no `json` tag is present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The top-level key is always the camelCase form of the CAPI Kind. All nested keys are either based on the `json` struct tags in the provider's Go types or, if no `json` tag is present, they are derived from the camelCase version of the field name.
```
Maybe?

The following table lists example top-level keys and nested keys.

| CAPI Kind / Nested Keys    | Override Key Format        |
| -------------------------- | -------------------------- |
| `AWSCluster`               | `awsCluster`               |
| `ControlPlaneLoadBalancer` | `controlPlaneLoadBalancer` |
| `AzureManagedMachinePool`  | `azureManagedMachinePool`  |
| `VMSwappiness`             | `vmSwappiness`             |

> You can discover the available CAPI Kind and nested keys and their structure by reviewing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn about the available CAPI kinds, nested keys, and their structure by reviewing the
```

[reference docs](#supported-providers) for the target CAPI provider. For example, to find the key for control plane load
balancer type on AWS, review the `AWSCluster` API types and look for the relevant field.

```go hideClipboard title="ControlPlaneLoadBalancer excerpt from AWSCluster API types"
type AWSClusterSpec struct {
    ...
	  // ControlPlaneLoadBalancer is optional configuration for customizing control plane behavior.
	  // +optional
	  ControlPlaneLoadBalancer *AWSLoadBalancerSpec `json:"controlPlaneLoadBalancer,omitempty"`
    ...
}
```

Refer to [References and Examples](#references-and-examples) for more example override YAML snippets and their
corresponding CAPI fields.

### Override YAML Structure

The structure of your override YAML maps directly to the Go struct definitions in the provider's types files. To
construct valid override YAML, use the following steps.

1. Start with the top-level key.

>    Use the CAPI Kind for your target resource, converted to [camelCase](#key-format):

Author: ```suggestion
   Use the CAPI Kind for your target resource, converted to [camelCase](#key-format).
```

   ```yaml hideClipboard
   awsCluster:
   ```

   ```yaml hideClipboard
   azureManagedMachinePool:
   ```

2. Add `spec`.

   All configurable properties sit under `spec`. Your YAML always begins with the top-level key followed by `spec`.

3. Locate the field in the Spec struct.

   Open the provider's types file and find the Spec struct for your resource. For example, `AWSClusterSpec` in
   `awscluster_types.go`. Find the field you want to set and read its `json` struct tag for the key name.

   ```go hideClipboard title="AWSClusterSpec excerpt"
   type AWSClusterSpec struct {
       // AdditionalTags is an optional set of tags to add to AWS resources.
       // +optional
       AdditionalTags Tags `json:"additionalTags,omitempty"`
   }
   ```

   This maps to the following override YAML.

   ```yaml hideClipboard
   awsCluster:
     spec:
       additionalTags:
         key: value
   ```

4. Follow nested struct references.

   When a field's type is another struct, navigate into that struct to find its fields. For example,

>    `ControlPlaneLoadBalancer` in `AWSClusterSpec` is of type `*AWSLoadBalancerSpec`:

Author: ```suggestion
   `ControlPlaneLoadBalancer` in `AWSClusterSpec` is of type `*AWSLoadBalancerSpec`.
```

   ```go hideClipboard title="AWSClusterSpec and AWSLoadBalancerSpec excerpts"
   // AWSClusterSpec
   ControlPlaneLoadBalancer *AWSLoadBalancerSpec `json:"controlPlaneLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

   // AWSLoadBalancerSpec
   type AWSLoadBalancerSpec struct {
       CrossZoneLoadBalancing bool `json:"crossZoneLoadBalancing"`
   }
   ```

   This maps to the following override YAML.

   ```yaml hideClipboard
   awsCluster:
     spec:
       controlPlaneLoadBalancer:
         crossZoneLoadBalancing: true
   ```

5. Handle inline struct embeddings.

   Some Spec structs embed another struct with `json:",inline"`. This promotes the embedded struct's fields to the same

>    level — no additional key is needed. For example, `AzureManagedControlPlaneSpec` embeds

Author: ```suggestion
   level and no additional key is needed. For example, `AzureManagedControlPlaneSpec` embeds
```

   `AzureManagedControlPlaneClassSpec` inline.

   ```go hideClipboard title="AzureManagedControlPlaneSpec excerpt"
   type AzureManagedControlPlaneSpec struct {
       AzureManagedControlPlaneClassSpec `json:",inline"`
       ...
   }
   ```

   Fields defined in `AzureManagedControlPlaneClassSpec` appear directly under `azureManagedControlPlane.spec`, without
   an additional nesting key.

   <details>

   <summary> Note on `AWSMachineTemplate` nesting </summary>

   `AWSMachineTemplate` has an extra level of nesting compared to other resources. The spec wraps a `template`, which

>    contains a nested `spec` holding the actual machine configuration (`AWSMachineSpec`). All pool-level AWS overrides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   contains another `spec` field that holds the actual machine configuration (`AWSMachineSpec`). All pool-level AWS overrides
```

   use this structure.

   ```yaml hideClipboard
   awsMachineTemplate:
     spec:
       template:
         spec:
           instanceType: m5.xlarge
   ```

   </details>

### Cluster-Level vs. Pool-Level Override

| Level       | Where it is set                   | What it targets                                                           | Top-Level Key Examples                          |
| ----------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| **Cluster** | Cluster-level cloud configuration | The primary cluster-scoped CAPI control plane or infrastructure resource. | `awsCluster`, `azureManagedControlPlane`        |
| **Pool**    | Node pool configuration           | The CAPI machine pool or machine template object for that node pool.      | `awsMachineTemplate`, `azureManagedMachinePool` |

Both levels can be used independently or together on the same cluster.

## Important Behaviors

Before overriding CAPI properties, review the following behaviors that apply when you configure a cluster or node pool.

### Repave Behavior

> :::caution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning
```
Caution is deprecated 

<img width="536" height="145" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fb835941-9282-4aa5-a72c-48366e1005f5" />

Overriding CAPI properties on an existing cluster is likely to trigger a
[node pool repave](../../clusters/cluster-management/node-pool.md#repave-behavior-and-configuration), which will

> temporarily reduce cluster capacity. Plan override changes during a maintenance window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[node pool repave](../../clusters/cluster-management/node-pool.md#repave-behavior-and-configuration), which temporarily reduces cluster capacity. Plan override changes during a maintenance window.
```

> - **AKS** — Any override change triggers a rolling upgrade, even for parameters that would otherwise support inline

Author: ```suggestion
- **AKS** - Any override change triggers a rolling upgrade, even for parameters that would otherwise support inline
```

  updates.

:::

### Override Always Wins

Override values take precedence over values from all other input sources, such as:

- Palette's native defaults
- Cluster configuration
- Node pool configuration
- Pack values

> If a field is set through any of these sources and also set in override, the override value always wins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a field is set through any of these sources and also set in override, the override value is always applied.
```

### Array Replacement

RFC 7396 merge patch replaces arrays in their entirety. For example, if you set `azureManagedMachinePool.spec.taints`,
this replaces _all_ taints on the node pool, including any that Palette set.

Combine your desired values with any existing values Palette configures.

### Immutable Fields

> Some CAPI provider fields are immutable after a cluster is created and cannot be changed on day 2. Palette does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some CAPI provider fields are immutable after a cluster is created and cannot be changed on Day-2. Palette does not
```

validate whether a field is immutable, so it is your responsibility to check the relevant provider's CAPI spec or cloud
provider API documentation before applying an override to an existing cluster.

If you attempt to update an immutable field, behavior depends on the cloud provider. The provider may return an error,

> which Palette surfaces as a `Warning` cluster event (see [Error Handling](#error-handling)), or the cloud provider may

Author: ```suggestion
which Palette surfaces as a warning cluster event (refer to [Error Handling](#error-handling)), or the cloud provider may
```

may silently accept the value without applying it.

### Palette UI does not Reflect Overridden Values

The Palette UI displays the values you entered in the standard fields, not the values actually applied to the cluster
after an override. For example, if you set an instance type of `n1-standard-2` in the UI but override it to

> `n2-standard-4` in the override configuration, the cluster will use `n2-standard-4` and the UI will continue to display

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`n2-standard-4` in the override configuration, the cluster uses `n2-standard-4` and the UI continues to display
```

## First-Class Support vs. Override

The following table describes the guidelines for when we want to support a feature natively or leave it to an override.

| Approach                 | When it applies                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Native (first-class)** | - Strategic, broadly needed features. <br /> - Compliance or security features that require an auditable UI. <br /> - Features requiring Palette-managed cloud metadata (for example, dynamic subnet selection). |
| **Override**             | - Niche per-tenant configurations. <br /> - Provider fields that evolve frequently upstream. <br /> - Features that do not meet the criteria for native support.                                                 |

## Troubleshooting

### No Semantic Validation

> Palette only validates that the override YAML format is valid. It does not validate field names, types, or values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Palette only checks that the override YAML format is valid. It does not validate field names, types, or values
```
To avoid saying "validates that the ... format is valid"

> against the CAPI provider schema, and it does not check whether a field is immutable. Invalid fields will produce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
against the CAPI provider schema, and it does not check whether a field is immutable. Invalid fields produce
```

> Warning events on the cluster (see [Error Handling](#error-handling)).

Author: ```suggestion
warning events on the cluster (refer to [Error Handling](#error-handling)).
```

---
sidebar_label: "Override Cluster API Properties"
title: "Override Cluster API (CAPI) Properties"
description:
  "Learn how to override Cluster API (CAPI) properties and configure advanced settings not exposed by Palette."
icon: ""
hide_table_of_contents: false
tags: ["architecture", "capi", "cluster api", "advanced configuration"]
---

:::preview

:::

Palette uses [Cluster API (CAPI)](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/) and its cloud-specific provider extensions to
provision and manage Kubernetes clusters. When provisioning a cluster, Palette populates only a curated subset of the
properties supported by the underlying CAPI objects. For most use cases, this is sufficient. However, some advanced or
provider-specific configurations exist in the CAPI provider spec but are not surfaced in the Palette UI or API.

> You can override these properties by supplying arbitrary YAML directly targeting the underlying CAPI provider objects at

Reviewer 2: Let's not use the word arbitrary here

Author: Bah, I was supposed to remove this earlier. Thanks for the keen eye.

Author: ```suggestion
You can override these properties by supplying YAML directly targeting the underlying CAPI provider objects at
```

- [Palette UI](https://console.spectrocloud.com/)
- [Palette API](/api/introduction/)
- [Spectro Cloud Terraform Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/spectrocloud/spectrocloud/latest/docs)
- [Palette Crossplane Provider](https://marketplace.upbound.io/providers/crossplane-contrib/provider-palette/)

## How Overrides Work

You supply a raw YAML string that describes the properties you want to set on the underlying CAPI object. Palette
applies this as an [RFC 7396 JSON merge patch](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7396) to the CAPI object it has
already built. Palette converts the YAML to JSON before applying the merge patch.

The YAML you provide maps directly to the specification of the target CAPI object. For example, if you want to set the
control plane load balancer type with additional cluster tags on an AWS IaaS cluster, you would provide override YAML
that maps to `awsCluster.spec`.

```yaml hideClipboard title="Example AWSCluster override YAML"
awsCluster:
  spec:
    controlPlaneLoadBalancer:
      loadBalancerType: nlb
      preserveClientIP: true
    additionalTags:

>       env: test

Reviewer 2: Don't you need hyphens for lists in yaml?

Author: This is a map, not a slice, so it doesn't need hyphens.

`map[string]string`

Rather than `[]struct`.

| ----------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| **Cluster** | Cluster-level cloud configuration | The primary cluster-scoped CAPI control plane or infrastructure resource. | `awsCluster`, `azureManagedControlPlane`        |
| **Pool**    | Node pool configuration           | The CAPI machine pool or machine template object for that node pool.      | `awsMachineTemplate`, `azureManagedMachinePool` |

Both levels can be used independently or together on the same cluster.

## Important Behaviors

Before overriding CAPI properties, review the following behaviors that apply when you configure a cluster or node pool.

### Repave Behavior

:::caution

Using an override on an existing cluster may trigger a
[node pool repave](../../clusters/cluster-management/node-pool.md#repave-behavior-and-configuration), which will
temporarily reduce cluster capacity. Plan override changes during a maintenance window.

:::

> The following behaviors apply when you update an existing cluster with an override:

Reviewer 2: Maybe there's some nuance here that I'm not understanding but it seems like overriding a property may cause repaves across all scenarios and can't be predicted. Should we just leave it at that - "Overriding CAPI properties will likely cause a rolling repave of your nodes"

Author: Sure, I did think this was a bit redundant after the caution, so this makes sense.

- **Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) clusters** — Any override change produces a new machine template hash,
  automatically triggering a rolling update.

- **Managed Kubernetes clusters** — Override changes are detected via a stored hash annotation. A repave warning is
  always shown when you apply an override since the impact cannot be predicted in advance.

  - **AKS** — Any override change triggers a rolling upgrade, even for parameters that would otherwise support inline

>     updates.

Author: ````suggestion
:::caution

Overriding CAPI properties on an existing cluster is likely to trigger a
[node pool repave](../../clusters/cluster-management/node-pool.md#repave-behavior-and-configuration), which will
temporarily reduce cluster capacity. Plan override changes during a maintenance window.

- **AKS** — Any override change triggers a rolling upgrade, even for parameters that would otherwise support inline
  updates.

:::
````

### Override Always Wins

Override values take precedence over values from all other input sources, such as:

- Palette's native defaults
- Cluster configuration
- Node pool configuration
- Pack values

If a field is set through any of these sources and also set in override, the override value always wins.

### Array Replacement

RFC 7396 merge patch replaces arrays in their entirety. For example, if you set `azureManagedMachinePool.spec.taints`,
this replaces _all_ taints on the node pool, including any that Palette set.

Combine your desired values with any existing values Palette configures.

### Immutable Fields

Some CAPI provider fields are immutable after a cluster is created and cannot be changed on day 2. Palette does not
validate whether a field is immutable, so it is your responsibility to check the relevant provider's CAPI spec or cloud
provider API documentation before applying an override to an existing cluster.

> If you attempt to update an immutable field, behavior depends on the cloud provider. The provider may return an error,

Reviewer 2: > The provider may return an error,
which Palette surfaces as a `Warning` cluster event (see [Error Handling](#error-handling)), or it may silently accept
the value without applying it

On the above line the "it may silently accept" makes it seem that the "it" here is Palette. We should clarify that it's the cloud provider:

> The provider may return an error,
which Palette surfaces as a `Warning` cluster event (see [Error Handling](#error-handling)), or the provider may silently accept
the value without applying it

which Palette surfaces as a `Warning` cluster event (see [Error Handling](#error-handling)), or it may silently accept

> the value without applying it.

Author: ```suggestion
which Palette surfaces as a `Warning` cluster event (see [Error Handling](#error-handling)), or the cloud provider may silently accept
the value without applying it.
```
